>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> It's everywhere you look.
>> You cannot walk down the
street without being bombarded.
>> They call it a clutter
crisis.
>> Consumers are like roaches.
You spray them and spray them,
and after a while it doesn't
work anymore.
We develop immunities.
>> And the multibillion-dollar
advertising industry is in a
desperate struggle to break
through.
>> We don't just come forward
with what we want to sell.
We engage you with things that
you want.
>> Advertisers have blurred the
line between programming and
product.
>> It's advertising that people
not only will tolerate, but will
actually go in search of.
>> The way God and Madison
Avenue intended.
>> But how is advertising
affecting our lives and the
world around us?
>> Once a culture becomes
entirely advertising-friendly,
it ceases to be a culture at
all.
>> Tonight on Frontline...
>> I'm sure people ask you this
all the time: What about the
environment?
>> ...correspondent Douglas
Rushkoff take you inside the
changing world of The
Persuaders.
>> DOUGLAS RUSHKOFF: A spring
night in New York City.
( horn honks )
Two men hunt for just the right
building.
>> We're always looking for a
new wall to kind of do our thing
on.
>> RUSHKOFF: They may not look
it, but these guys are preparing
a guerrilla operation.
>> We kind of just scope out for
a good location, and wherever we
end up, we end up.
>> This is where we're going,
this construction site right
here.
>> RUSHKOFF: At last they find
the building they've been
looking for.
They line up the target in their
sights.
What's this covert mission all
about?
It's a new kind of urban
warfare, a sneaker company's
all-out battle for our
attention.
>> You cannot walk down the
street without being bombarded.
You stand in an elevator,
looking at advertising in the
corner of the elevator car.
And you go and you play golf and
you go to pick the ball up out
of the cup, and there's an ad in
the bottom of it.
And you look up at the sky, and
there's skywriting.
And you look at a bus passing,
and there's advertising.
And you walk in Times Square,
and you go, "Is this Las Vegas
on the Hudson?
Am I trapped inside a pinball
machine?"
>> RUSHKOFF: Welcome to the new
American metropolis.
Somewhere beneath all these ads
is the city I grew up in, but
over the last 20 years, it's
grown a second skin, a twinkling
membrane of commercial messages.
Advertisers have become
prospectors for new space in an
ever more crowded landscape.
Even a subway tunnel becomes the
backdrop for an American Express
promotion.
But advertisers have a big
problem: the more messages they
create, the more they have to
create to reach us.
It's led to a vicious circle of
clutter.
>> They are the ones who make
They are, therefore, also the
ones who are always trying
desperately to break through the
clutter.
That's the line you always hear
in ad agencies: "We can break
through the clutter with this."
Well, every effort to break
through the clutter is just more
clutter.
>> You know, I have a quote in
my book from an advertising
executive who says, "Consumers
are like roaches: You spray them
and spray them, and after a
while it doesn't work anymore."
We develop immunities.
>> RUSHKOFF: So what's an
advertiser supposed to do?
Stop advertising?
That's the one thing they know
they can't do, because the
moment they stop trying to
persuade us, we forget about
them.
>> Once you're in the game, you
can't stop, if for no other
reason that the competition will
eat you alive.
>> What advertising has always
wanted to do is not simply to
suffuse the atmosphere, but to
become the atmosphere.
It wants us not to be able to
find a way outside of the world
that it creates for us.
>> RUSHKOFF: So this is the way
our world fills up with
advertising.
For years I've been studying and
writing about what I call the
persuasion industry.
I've even worked in it, but I
still can't say for sure where
all this is headed.
Where will the advertising arms
race lead?
To a world made of marketing?
And what would that mean for us?
I set out on a tour through the
modern machinery of selling to
meet some of the persuaders up
close.
My first stop: a downtown
New York storefront.
>> Where to?
>> I'm not singing.
>> RUSHKOFF: I've been invited
to a hip party.
Or something that looks like
one.
>> Do they serve this on the
plane?
>> RUSHKOFF: What this really
is, is the opening salvo in a
marketing blitz for a new
airline.
>> Go.
>> RUSHKOFF: They call
themselves Song.
Song is a subsidiary of Delta
Airlines, but you won't find any
mention of Delta here.
Delta is old-fashioned air
travel, and Song is their way of
persuading us that they can
compete with hip, low-cost
carriers like Jet Blue.
>> A lot of people ask us,
"You've got to be crazy, you're
starting an airline in the worst
environment in the history of
U.S. commercial aviation."
And we were, and we are.
That process gets more and more
complex.
>> RUSHKOFF: Delta broke off a
team of their best marketers and
told them to start from scratch.
>> It was also was the kind of
the creative idea that runs
through each of these.
>> RUSHKOFF: The first thing the
Song team decided was that it
wasn't enough just to launch a
new airline.
To get our attention, they had
to invent a new culture around
flying.
>> Which is to sort of capture
consumers' imagination.
>> RUSHKOFF: But how do you do
that?
>> Talk to me a little bit about
why you chose the things you
did.
>> RUSHKOFF: Song started with a
trusted tool: the focus group.
>> The homework was, choose
images, words, things that
capture what might be your ideal
experience of traveling by air.
>> RUSHKOFF: Before long, Song's
research yielded a nugget: there
was a large group of flyers
whose needs and desires were
being ignored-- women.
>> The food I think they could
improve a lot, you know.
>> It was an incredible insight
to say that this could be the
first airline that had, you
know, a real, you know,
understanding, a much deeper
understanding of women and
women's interests.
>> RUSHKOFF: The Song team
created a detailed profile of
their target consumer, and even
gave her a name-- Carrie.
>> She's got three children, a
husband.
They both work.
They have an SUV and a sports
car, Neiman-Marcus credit cards,
but she shops at Target.
She has got a propensity to read
kind of high-end literature, but
she finds guilty pleasure in
"People" magazine.
And she doesn't have an airline.
>> Here's our organic menus.
>> RUSHKOFF: Song would have low
fares, organic food, and more
entertainment options, but most
importantly, it would forge a
real connection with women.
>> This is what they're going to
look like.
>> Oh, excellent.
>> RUSHKOFF: To pull that off,
Song turned to a pro, Andy
Spade.
Spade is the co-creator of the
Kate Spade Company, a multi-
million-dollar line of fashion
accessories that caters to women
like Carrie.
>> I think early on when you're
shaping a new brand, you need
those brand visionaries.
He's got a gift, and he's had it
since the very first time we
started working with him, and
that's why we love him so much.
>> What are they going to do in
this day?
>> He gets us more than we get
ourselves.
>> We liked the eight-track
player in this TV.
I bring ideas, kind of visualize
ideas that companies have, and
give them kind of a substance
and a texture and a life that
they may not know how to create.
And I bring that.
I take their idea or their point
of view, and I try to create
this... make it into something
that's bigger-- maybe emotional,
maybe optimistic; you know,
maybe classical; maybe, you
know, happy.
>> I think that I'll just start
by introducing, you know, kind
of the concept and what it is.
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade's been
charged with producing Song's TV
campaign, the first impression
the airline will make on many
Americans.
>> All right, so why don't we
start?
We're going to create a campaign
for Song that was spirited, that
delivered on the benefits that
we think are the most important.
Do it in a way that is
emotional.
Do it in a way that I think is
optimistic, because we believe
that's part of the Song ethos.
So we're going to take you
through five different concepts
and five different commercials
that deliver on five different,
different benefits which we
believe differentiate Song from
everyone else.
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade is proposing
to downplay the airline's new
features in favor of something
much more intangible, its soul.
>> There's a book called
"Lovers" here, which I don't
know if any of you are familiar
with the book "Lovers."
I'll pass it around.
But they're these sweet, sweet
images, and we were kind of
inspired by this a few times, of
just people together, and mainly
Goddard and Truffaut movies and
all those old French new-wave
films, and then there are
American films.
>> [music] When you're alone
and life is making you lonely
[music] You can always go
Downtown... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade's commercials
will show no planes, no
travelers, no low fares, no
airline.
>> [music] Downtown... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: This is an
enormously risky strategy.
These commercials as planned
will consume almost a third of
Song's $12 million marketing
budget.
If the campaign doesn't connect,
Song will just become part of
the noise.
And Delta, at the brink of
bankruptcy, cannot afford for
its new venture to fail.
At least one member of Song's
team is nervous.
>> Well, the risk is you invest
an inordinate amount of money
behind a message that is a
fairly ethereal message that, as
they say, doesn't feed the
bulldog.
I mean, this is a business;
this isn't an art form.
So we have got to ensure that
it's communication that drives
commerce, not just makes people
feel good.
>> The number-one purchase
driver for this category is, in
fact, first price.
The strategy is the everyday
low-price airline that happens
to have more style and
everything else that we're
doing.
>> The more we pulled back and
tried to make it a very, very
kind of literal delivery on a
benefit, it just lost that
emotion, and we wanted to keep
that emotion.
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade isn't backing
off.
He's not content just to convey
information; he's aiming for
something bigger.
>> At the end of the day you
want to be part of culture, and
when you get to that point,
you've created a huge success.
And that's what all the great,
great, I think, companies have
done, from Virgin to Apple to
others.
>> I think by spending 25
seconds on the style and the
spirits, this is a void in your
category, and you have to get
there first.
That's more important than
really building a spot around
low fare.
I mean, everyone, you know, is
going to be low-fare.
What really differentiates
something from another thing?
I think it's, it's creating kind
of, kind of something that
communicates to people on, on
another level, beyond a logical
level.
>> RUSHKOFF: The question is an
advertising classic: should the
pitch be aimed at the head or
the heart?
How creative can an ad get and
still be an ad?
>> Someone once wrote a book
called "Advertisements For
Myself."
That's what's advertising is.
It's advertising for the guys
who are creating it far more
than it is for the guys who are
paying for it.
They're trying to win awards,
they're trying to make more
money, they're trying to build
their own portfolio, they're
trying to get a better job,
they're trying to make up for
the fact that they're in
advertising and not directing
films or doing standup comedy or
painting paintings or whatever
they would prefer to do, I
guarantee you, and the
consequence is, a lot of
advertising that's quite
extravagant in its look or very
clever and entertaining and
funny, but which doesn't do the
thing that advertising is
supposed to do, which is make
you want to buy the good or
service that's nominally being
advertised.
>> Look at the coffee as it gets
darker and stronger.
>> RUSHKOFF: Not so long ago,
the high-concept ads of today
were all but unthinkable.
>> Soap has never smelled this
good before, and neither have
you.
>> RUSHKOFF: Ads laid claim to
real, tangible differences
between one product and another.
>> What were brands?
They were based on what I call
"er" words-- whiter, brighter,
cleaner, stronger.
>> ...smoothest, mildest,
tastiest cigarette...
>> Watch any commercials on
American TV, and you'll see
these words up in the first
three seconds, hammered
remorselessly into your brain.
>> RUSHKOFF: But at some point,
these words ceased to have
meaning.
We no longer believed that one
product was any brighter or
cleaner than any other.
>> Everything works now, you
know.
French Fries taste crisp,
coffee's hot, you know, beer
tastes good.
Unless you live in America, and
then, you know, you've got to
live with what you get.
But all these things now are
table stakes.
>> RUSHKOFF: By the early 1990s,
a new approach to marketing came
to the fore, one that leapt
right over what the product did
to what the product meant.
>> You know, it's not just a
car.
It's an expression of the
culture, an aesthetic that is
connected, somehow, to nature.
Infiniti.
>> These were the super brands
like Nike, Starbucks, The Body
Shop.
And what they noticed these
brands had in common was that
they were, they were engaging in
a kind of a sort of pseudo-
spiritual marketing.
So Nike said that they were
about the meaning of sports, but
more than that, that they were
about transcendence through
sports.
Starbucks said that they were
about the idea of community, of
place; that is, a third place
that is not home, not work.
Benetton was, of course, selling
multiculturalism, racial
diversity.
>> RUSHKOFF: This lesson, that a
brand could forge an emotional,
even spiritual bond with today's
cynical consumer, wasn't lost on
corporate America.
>> What are you saying with your
Chinet plates?
>> There's a wave of corporate
epiphanies in the mid-90s, where
all these companies, you know,
were told, "You know what your
problem is, is you don't have a
big idea behind your brand."
So they would hire high-priced
consultants, and they would have
these kind of corporate sweat
lodges and gather around the
campfire and sort of try to
channel their inner brand
meaning.
And they would emerge from these
processes sort of flushed and
say, you know, "Polaroid isn't a
camera, it's a social
lubricant."
>> When I was a brand manager at
Proctor & Gamble, my job was
basically to make sure the
product was good, develop new
advertising copy, design the
pack.
Now a brand manager has an
entirely different kind of
responsibility.
In fact, they have more
Their job now is to create and
maintain a whole meaning system
for people through which they
get identity and understanding
of the world.
Their job now is to be a
community leader.
It is the big monopolistic,
yeah, yeah...
>> RUSHKOFF: Ad strategist
Douglas Atkin, an expert on the
relationship between consumers
and brands, says he had a eureka
moment one night during a focus
group.
>> I was in a research facility
watching eight people rhapsodize
about a sneaker.
I thought, where is this coming
from?
This is, at the end of the day,
a piece of footwear.
But the terms they were using
were evangelical.
So, I thought, if these people
are expressing cult-like
devotion, then why not study
cults?
Why not study the original?
Find out why people join cults,
and apply that knowledge to
brands.
>> I'm loyal to this practice
because it's done so much for
me.
>> RUSHKOFF: If Atkin could find
what pushed a person from mere
fan to devoted disciple, perhaps
he could market that knowledge.
>> Most of the people I discuss
the WWF with know that it's not
a sport.
>> Right.
>> It's a masculine ballet.
>> RUSHKOFF: So he compared
dozens of groups he considered
cults with so-called cult
brands, from Hare Krishna to
Harley Davidson...
>> If you're smart, and kind of
individual, that's what you
drive.
>> RUSHKOFF: ...from Falun Gong
to Mac.
>> I think there's something
about Mac users, like, they get
it.
>> We just had discovered
something.
>> They realized there are other
people like them, and they
cooperate on certain projects,
and it's part of belonging to
the tribe.
>> And the conclusion was this,
is that people, whether they're
joining a cult or joining a
brand, do so for exactly the
same reasons: they need to
belong, and they want to make
meaning.
We need to figure out what the
world is all about, and we need
the company of others.
It's simply that.
Saturn is a really good example.
It's a mass cult brand.
For example, 45,000 people
turned up to spend their holiday
vacation time at the factory in
Tennessee instead of going to
Disney World or the Grand
Canyon.
Now why would they do that?
It's because they wanted to meet
other people who own Saturn's,
they wanted to meet the rest of
the Saturn family, they wanted
to meet the people who made the
car.
The people who made the car
wanted to meet them.
And the people who ran the
Saturn business knew that.
>> RUSHKOFF: They not only knew
it, they turned it into an ad,
which only brought more people
into the Saturn family.
>> We called it the Saturn
homecoming.
They could see where the idea
for a new kind of car company
had taken shape, and we could
thank them for believing we
could do it.
>> They created a great meaning
system for Saturn in those
fantastic commercials.
Their meaning system was based
on old-time values of community.
It was a kind of an icon that
America yearned for, but
couldn't find anymore.
>> RUSHKOFF: And that's the
object of emotional branding, to
fill the empty places where non-
commercial institutions, like
schools and churches, might have
once done the job.
Brands become more than just a
mark of quality; they become an
invitation to a longed-for
lifestyle, a ready-made
identity.
>> The campaign for iPod is
remarkable.
When I see the poster as I'm
passing by, when I go on the web
site and it comes to life and I
hear the music track going, and
then when I put... when I put my
little iPod earpods on, and I
see the white cords against my
black jacket, I'm in that
poster, and the poster is me.
And then the music, my music,
comes over my iPod, and it's a
brand experience.
>> When you listen to brand
managers talk, you can get quite
carried away in this idea that
they actually are fulfilling
these needs that we have for
community and narrative and
transcendence, but in the end,
it is, you know, a laptop and a
pair of running shoes.
And they might be great, but
they're not actually going to
fulfill those needs, so... which
serves them very well, because
of course that means that you
have to go shopping again.
>> RUSHKOFF: Ironically, this
new, more spiritual trend in
branding has ultimately put
enormous pressure back on ad
agencies.
There are only so many big
concepts to go around.
Starry-eyed advertisers looking
to become the next big thing are
constantly dropping one agency
for another.
This churning of accounts has
left hundreds of agencies
weakened and vulnerable to
takeover by one of six mammoth
holding companies, most notably
Publicis, Interpublic, WPP, and
Omnicom.
Each has snapped up dozens of
advertising, PR, and market-
research firms, consolidating
their operations and slashing
jobs.
This cutthroat economic climate
means that, for many ad
agencies, their most important
pitch of all is for themselves.
>> There's a lot of fear in the
agency business right now.
They are basically becoming
commodities, and they're trying
to figure out how to
differentiate themselves.
And if you boil down, if you
went to the web sites of the top
20 ad agencies and you looked at
what each one uses as the slogan
or the motto that they think
differentiates themselves from
their competitors, these things
read almost absurdly like the
same sentence, cast a lot of
different ways.
>> Deliver knockout creativity.
>> Boy, does the world need
breakthrough ideas.
>> RUSHKOFF: Kevin Roberts is
the CEO of Saatchi & Saatchi.
What used to be the biggest
player in the ad business is now
a small subsidiary of a giant
French holding company.
In the weeks before we saw Kevin
Roberts, Saatchi took a major
blow, losing $185 million in
billings from its client Johnson
& Johnson, including the Tylenol
account that Saatchi had held
for 28 years.
But Roberts is undaunted.
He thinks he's found a path to
revive Saatchi's fortunes.
>> You feel the world through
your senses, the five senses,
and that's what's next.
The brands that can move to that
emotional level, that can create
loyalty beyond reason, are going
to be the brands where premium
profits lie.
So we figured out what the
answer was, that there was
something in outstanding brands.
>> RUSHKOFF: What sets Roberts'
big idea apart from his
competitors' is its boldness.
He claims he has discovered the
formula to turn nearly any
product into an object of
devotion.
>> That there were brands that
connected, and there were brands
that people loved.
They didn't like them, they
didn't admire them, they didn't
respect them, they didn't use
them.
None of that wimpy-wompy stuff.
They loved them.
>> RUSHKOFF: Roberts calls his
big idea love marks.
What is a love mark?
>> A love mark is a brand that
has created loyalty beyond
reason, that's infused with
mystery, sensuality, and
intimacy, and that you recognize
immediately as having some kind
of iconic place in your heart.
>> Happy holidays from
Cheerios.
>> Well, where's the mystery in
a Cheerios?
>> Oh, Cheerios is full of
mystery!
Do you... I mean, you don't
think that people just eat
these, putting them in a bowl,
do you?
And that's not how they eat them
anyway.
Most kids play with them, they
make stories up about them, they
imagine them.
We shot this great commercial
with a grandma and a baby.
>> You know how much Grandma
wanted to be here for your first
Christmas?
She came a long way.
You see, Grandma lives way down
here.
Brian, your cousin-- he's a
little bit older than you-- he
lives here, in Chicago.
>> You can build mystery as long
as you believe in the story.
>> But no matter where Grandma
lives, we'll always be together
for Christmas.
>> Happy holidays from Cheerios.
>> You just ate Dallas!
>> You know, we've moved from
brands into experiences.
Look at Tide, for instance, in
the U.S.
Tide's no longer a laundry
detergent.
It's not about getting clothes
clean anymore.
All detergents get your clothes
clean.
Tide's about a much deeper,
deeper thing than that.
It's an enabler.
It's a liberator.
It's... I guess you could think
about moving Tide from the heart
of the laundry to the heart of
the family.
>> [music] Take me home
Take me home
[music] Yeah
To my family... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: I guess so.
But how many brands ever really
succeed in creating loyalty
beyond reason?
>> There are a few examples when
advertising really does cast a
Svengali spell.
AT&T has done it.
Hallmark has done it.
Coca-Cola has done it.
But most of the people who've
tried to make emotional
connections with consumers over
the years, by far the vast, vast
majority have failed.
They've gone down in flames.
>> Think about it this way.
Instead of saying, "That's so
cool," you'll say, "That's so
Song."
>> RUSHKOFF: Just six months
after it was first conceived,
Song Airlines is in the skies.
What began as a new way to
market Delta's lower-cost
flights has emerged as a
company-wide culture, an ethos
imprinted onto every available
surface.
>> You can never be the only
carrier or the only product
offering a certain attribute for
so long.
So what we're trying to do with
Song is, there is a spirit that
you can't copy.
There is that emotional bond
that we are trying to get with
our customers that cannot be
copied.
We are not an airline; we are
Song.
>> I think Song, you know, is
about a lifestyle.
It's more than an airline.
You know, our translation is, we
want to create a movement.
We want to create a movement of
people that are going to have
>> RUSHKOFF: Song hired one of
the world's leading branding
agencies to create a name and a
look like no other airline's.
>> The logo is the easy part.
It's everything else.
It goes from the ticket jacket,
to the boarding pass, to the
screen on the kiosk when you
check in, to what's on the back
wall behind that kiosk when you
check in, to what goes on the
screen that says what time your
flight is leaving, to what the
gate area looks like.
Then you move on board the
plane.
What does the outside of the
plane look like?
What does the inside of the
That means carpet, that means
bulkhead patterns in front of
the seats.
What goes on the baby-changing
table in the lav?
What does the lav smell like?
>> RUSHKOFF: Song not only
branded their planes, they
branded their people.
Instead of holding job
interviews, Song auditioned
their flight attendants, then
taught them how to "be Song,"
giving them scripts for what to
say and how to act.
>> "Song" is becoming an
adjective at our airline.
So we've got an expression, "You
are so Song."
We can never do anything that's
off-Song or off-tune.
It has to be on-brand.
>> RUSHKOFF: Did they kind of
teach you to be Song?
>> Oh, no, we had Song in us
before Song was Song.
>> RUSHKOFF: Really?
( laughs )
So they give you more permission
to be Song?
>> They were like, "You are so
Song.
Bring it, show it."
Right?
>> Bring it on.
>> "Be it.
Be Song."
>> RUSHKOFF: Have you ever done
anything that you were being and
it turned out wasn't Song?
>> What?
>> ( laughter )
>> RUSHKOFF: In other words,
you're just so Song-- in your
natural state, you just live
Song.
>> Always, always.
When I'm sleeping, when I'm
eating, when I'm breathing, when
I'm talking, I'm Song, baby.
>> RUSHKOFF: But despite Song's
enthusiasm, there's reason to
wonder if they are breaking
through the clutter.
A dozen actors with Song TV's
strapped to their stomachs got
lots of puzzled stares in the
streets of Boston.
>> I'm not sure, but I'm either
really drunk, or some strange
[no audio] going down here!
>> RUSHKOFF: But so did every
other walking billboard.
They've opened a new Song
concept store in Boston, but it
seems like one more distraction
in a giant mall, and it may have
raised more questions than it
answered.
>> So you're an airline?
>> Yes, we are.
>> Or a travel agency?
>> We're an airline.
>> RUSHKOFF: Can consumers see
through all of this brand
experience to the product Song
is supposed to be selling?
>> Okay.
>> You're welcome.
Have a great day.
>> RUSHKOFF: If you scratch the
self-confident surface of
advertising, you'll uncover an
unnerving anxiety: is any of
this really working?
There's an aphorism as old as
advertising itself: "I know I'm
wasting half my ad dollars; I
just don't know which half."
What works, when does it work,
and with whom?
The whispered truth on Madison
Avenue is that, despite enough
studies to fill a library, still
nobody really knows.
>> Ladies and gentlemen, the
executive producers and stars of
NYPD Blue, past and present!
>> RUSHKOFF: This is the
financial bedrock of the
advertising industry, called the
up-fronts, where every year
network TV executives present
their coming fall season and its
stars, and advertisers line up
to buy commercial minutes.
>> NYPD Blue, past and present.
>> RUSHKOFF: But in recent
years, the model has begun to
break down.
>> Where else in the world can
you be convinced to pay more for
a commodity that is experiencing
diminishing returns?
>> RUSHKOFF: Giant advertisers
like American Express are losing
faith in the traditional 30-
second ad.
>> We as advertisers are paying
more to reach less.
Now, the definition of insanity
is to continually do the same
thing over and over and expect
different results, right?
>> RUSHKOFF: Television
audiences are watching fewer
ads.
The networks are losing viewers
to cable, and the appearance of
digital video recorders like
TiVo now allow people to zap the
ads altogether.
>> Wow, that is quick.
>> More surrounds?
>> Advertisers are frightened.
I think they're sort of deer in
the headlights-- "What do we
do?"
Within, you know, a matter of
five years, we will have a huge
percentage of the country will
be, you know, will have this
technology.
Five years, you know, isn't a
lot of time in the, you know, in
terms of creating new models.
>> RUSHKOFF: So what
countermeasure have advertisers
come up with to the remote-
wielding viewer?
>> Aside from the stuff that I
got at J. Crew, I went to French
Connection.
These are from Clark's.
Steve Madden.
And I got you some great eyewear
from Ray-Ban.
>> RUSHKOFF: If the audience is
skipping commercials to get to
the programs, why not become
part of the programs themselves?
>> If I were starting Friends
today, instead of it taking
place in a coffee shop, a
generic coffee shop, if you were
Starbucks, wouldn't it be great
to have them meet in a
Starbucks?
You would never have to mention
cappuccino; it would just be
there.
>> RUSHKOFF: Starbucks may have
missed that opportunity, but the
world's largest coffee chain
caught a break on the next one.
In the big-budget Hollywood
movie I Am Sam, Sean Penn's
character doesn't just happen to
work at a Starbucks...
>> That's a wonderful choice,
Bruce.
>> RUSHKOFF: ...Starbucks
becomes a key character in the
story.
>> I need to make coffee!
I need to pay my lawyer!
>> The idea of taking a brand
and integrating all of its
assets into an idea where it
becomes a hero...
Let's look at Cast Away, for
example.
We open up getting on a plane.
The plane crashes.
All but one person is killed.
>> Four years ago...
>> How bold was that of Fred
Smith, the founder and chairman
of Fed Ex, A., to allow it, but
to do it himself?
>> ...a terrible and tragic day.
>> And at the end of the film,
not only did we deliver the
packages, but we found romance.
How much better could you feel
about the brand?
>> RUSHKOFF: Ad Age magazine
dubbed this alliance between New
York's ad men and Hollywood
studios "Madison and Vine."
It is the integration of
entertainment with advertising,
in a partnership that often
begins before a show is even
conceived.
>> Meanwhile, Samantha had used
her pushiness to parlay her new
man's hit off-Broadway show
into a hot on-Broadway poster.
>> RUSHKOFF: To mate a brand
with the once commercial-free
HBO series Sex and the City,
Absolut Vodka and HBO writers
worked out a story line in which
one of the show's characters
finds his way onto an Absolut
billboard.
HBO got to use the brand's name
in a key plot twist, and Absolut
got unprecedented access to
HBO's upscale audience.
>> Guess what I'm drinking?
An Absolut Hunk!
>> They created a drink called
the Absolut Hunk.
>> And you're delish.
>> So we went to the producers
of Sex and the City, and we
said, "Okay, we've got a real
product and a real drink called
the Absolut Hunk.
We want you to weave an entire
story line around this drink and
this product so that it is
unmistakably the conversation
piece on Monday morning at the
water cooler."
>> Wow!
>> It was quite the buzz.
>> The way God and Madison
Avenue intended.
>> There are agencies, for
instance, in Hollywood who go
through every script before it
is produced and find specific
opportunities for automobiles,
for beer, for virtually any
product that you might want to
name.
>> RUSHKOFF: One such agency is
called Integrated Entertainment
Partners, itself a marriage of
ad executives and entertainment
heavyweights like ex-Disney
President Rich Frank, who came
out of retirement on his Napa
Valley vineyard to grab a piece
of the action.
>> The networks cease being able
to generate the money to keep
their shows going.
They will be forced to change.
>> What we're talking about
essentially is how do we look at
this coming season's shows?
We've started to look at the
pilot season, to see what looks
like that's new that's coming
up, and that would look good for
Toyota.
>> RUSHKOFF: IEP looks for ways
to integrate products into
programs.
>> We've all heard about The
Contender this week, the
DreamWorks/Mark Burnett show
with Sylvester Stallone as the
Donald Trump character.
>> Right.
>> This show being a show about
amateur boxers.
How would that work for you
guys, in terms of brand?
>> Well, the first thing we
look, is there a strategic fit
with our vehicles?
So, let's see, boxing.
Is it... it's tough, and our
vehicles are tough-- is that
strong enough of a match to
make, you know, to get a good
message across?
What we're looking for is, it's
obvious why this vehicle is the
only vehicle that should be
placed this way, and then...
>> RUSHKOFF: Progress is slow.
There are still cultural
barriers between Madison Avenue
and Vine Street.
>> It's an uneasy alliance, if
you will, and it's also, it's
being driven, you know, by these
economic imperatives: "My
business model's broken; yours
is broken; maybe we can lean
against each other and make it
better.
Well, should I trust you, can I
trust you?
What do you get out of it, what
do I get out of it?
Just give me your money and
don't try and influence the
creative process."
>> Cheers.
>> RUSHKOFF: Neither advertisers
nor broadcasters are quite sure
how much these integrated ads
are really worth.
Some predict the whole
experiment will backfire.
Have advertisers finally gone
too far?
>> Could we get a couple more
Sierra Mists?
>> There's no secret that the
American public and the public
of every society on the face of
the earth is willing to consume
crap.
They consume crap, you know,
from their cupboards and
pantries, and they consume crap
on television.
But they're very particular
about which is which, and they
don't want to see them
conflated, and they don't want
the purity of their telecrap to
be adulterated by merchandising
of the fast-food crap, and they
will rebel.
>> RUSHKOFF: But there is little
evidence so far of an uprising
among consumers or Hollywood
creatives.
In fact, more and more deals are
being struck.
This summer, the USA network
broadcast a movie called The
Last Ride, written for the
Pontiac GTO and paid for by the
General Motors Corporation.
Variety magazine called it
"little more than a two-hour
infomercial designed to sell
muscle cars."
>> If you can tell that it was
advertising within the context
of content, it didn't work.
Okay?
It's not seamless enough.
>> Pontiac is proud to bring you
the all-new 2004 Pontiac GTO.
>> You can't talk about brand.
It's all about how the writer
and brand engage in that very,
very interesting, narrow space
so that it feels natural.
>> "Oh, no, it's not product
placement.
No, no, it's the seamless
integration of merchandise and
narrative."
No.
It's product placement.
And whatever kind of, you know,
MBA euphemism that you want to
attach to it, it's still product
placement.
>> RUSHKOFF: Some advertisers
are venturing even further into
programming.
BMW Motors took the first plunge
in 2001, developing a new form,
a perfect hybrid of ad and
movie.
BMW was not only the sponsor,
but also the creator.
>> They had these eight-minute
films shot by directors like Guy
Ritchie, starring people like
James Brown and Madonna.
>> If you'd keep your eyes on
the road instead of on me, we
might be getting somewhere.
>> And they were beautiful
little stories.
BMW's had starring roles, they
played integral parts in the
plot lines, and they put these
films on the internet.
It's advertising as a piece of
entertainment, in and of itself,
that people not only will
tolerate, but will actually go
in search of.
And BMW sales went dramatically
through the roof in the years
after these films aired.
>> Two.
>> Do you have a reservation?
>> Superman.
>> I don't see anything.
>> Might be under Man of Steel.
>> Man of Steel.
Man of Steel.
Oh, yeah, Man of Steel.
>> RUSHKOFF: American Express,
with one of the biggest
marketing budgets in the world,
has followed suit.
>> How could you possibly miss
this shot?
( laughter )
>> RUSHKOFF: In the last ten
years, they've cut the portion
of their budget devoted to
television ads by more than
half.
Instead, they're pouring
millions into a series of what
they call "webisodes," starring
their corporate pitch man, Jerry
Seinfeld, and directed by A-list
Hollywood veteran Barry
Levinson.
>> We're launching a new medium
here.
That should be central to
everything we talk about out
there in the market.
This is about... 'cause that's
where Jerry's excitement has
come from.
He, you know, he has been proud
to be part of, you know,
creating something brand-new
here.
>> Then we're going to have
online advertisement's going to
pop up at the end of watching
the webisode, which is going to
prompt people to apply for the
card.
We're going to get a lot of
learning to see what's sticky
about the site, what's engaging,
and then what can we carry forth
to other future experiences like
this, because, you know, this is
all about interacting with the
users in new ways.
>> We did it because consumers
want to be entertained.
It has an American Express
message built in.
We think it's built in in a
fairly seamless way.
It doesn't interfere with the
enjoyment of the entertainment.
So the consumer gets something,
and they start to see the value
of a relationship with American
Express.
We don't just come forward with
what we want to sell.
We engage you with things that
you want in terms of the
entertainment.
>> And I'm invulnerable to
damage, theft, or things
bouncing off of a superhero's
chest within 90 days of
purchase.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> RUSHKOFF: The boundaries
between content and advertising
are blurring in nearly every
popular medium.
Rock stars like Sting are
partnering up with big brands
and debuting their songs in
advertisements as a way of
reaching a wider audience.
Even anti-establishment icon Bob
Dylan starred in a hybrid of
music video and ad for
Victoria's Secret, and got his
CD stocked in their lingerie
stores to boot.
>> RUSHKOFF: The times they are
a-changin', some fear for the
worse.
>> Once a culture becomes
entirely advertising-friendly,
you... it ceases to be a culture
at all.
It ceases to be a culture worth
the name.
It has to have the constant mood
that shoppers require.
There has to be a kind of Muzak
playing in the background all
the time.
Now, you think back to those
dramas, those comedies that have
really stayed with you, that
have moved you tremendously,
that you want to see again, that
you think about for days.
Well, those kinds of works are
increasingly unlikely when the
stuff that's on TV basically
functions to sell Pepsis, to
sell Nikes, to sell selling, to
sell consumption.
>> This is the same idea as a
focus group, just a really,
really small group.
>> RUSHKOFF: Far away from the
boardrooms of the entertainment
industry, in places like this
nondescript office park outside
Boston, the nitty-gritty work of
selling starts, with a simple
questionnaire about bread.
>> And now what do you see as
the disadvantages to eating
grain-based foods?
>> RUSHKOFF: Today, faced with a
nation hooked on low-carb diets,
the baked-goods industry needs
to find out just how Americans
feel about their products.
>> Okay, I'm going to read you
some different emotions.
I've got a whole list of them
here.
For each one of them, I just
want you to tell me, yes or no,
as to whether or not you think
you feel that emotion when
you're eating white bread.
Okay?
All right, the first one is
accepting.
Do you feel accepting when
you're eating white bread?
>> Yeah, I would say yes.
>> Affectionate?
>> No.
>> Lonely?
>> Disappointed?
>> No.
>> Afraid?
>> Trusting?
>> No, I don't think that would
be an issue.
>> Would you feel uncertain?
>> Yeah, a little uncertain.
I've got one question.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Can I ask a question?
The question was, "When you eat
bread, do you feel lonely?"
Have you found people that say
yes, they feel lonely when
they're eating bread?
>> Not a lot on this one.
>> RUSHKOFF: Welcome to the
strange world of market
research...
>> Now, we have to be careful
because that's not politically
correct to say "women and..."
>> RUSHKOFF: ...where those who
claim to have figured out the
hidden desires of consumers are
treated as gurus.
>> We all come from a woman, we
all spend nine months inside of
a woman, so women are expert in
the inside.
Translation: When a woman buys a
car, the first thing they are
looking is, do they have cup
holders?
>> RUSHKOFF: Dr. Clotaire
Rapaille lives in a baronial
mansion in upstate New York.
>> ...price-quality
relationship...
>> RUSHKOFF: Fortune 500
companies and their advertising
agencies flock there to drink
French champagne, admire
Rapaille's many cars, and listen
with rapt attention to his
insights on the irrational mind
of the American shopper.
>> And we have to understand for
each product what is the dynamic
behind that, what is it that
people are really buying there?
We still have people that buy
things that they don't really
need.
Sometimes a product is not
expensive enough.
>> RUSHKOFF: What sets Rapaille
apart from many other market
researchers is his belief that
consumers are driven by
unconscious needs and impulses.
>> My experience is that most of
the time people have no idea why
they're doing what they're
doing.
They have no idea, so they're
going to try to make up
something that makes sense.
Why do you need a Hummer to go
shopping?
"Well, you know, in case I need
to go off-road."
Well, you live in Manhattan.
Why do you need a four-wheel
drive in Manhattan?
"Well, you know, sometimes I go
out, and I..."
I mean, this is... you don't
need to be a rocket scientist to
understand that this is
disconnected.
This has nothing to do with what
the real reason is for people to
do what they do.
>> RUSHKOFF: Rapaille began his
career as a psychiatrist in
Europe studying autism.
>> My training with autistic
children is that I had to
understand what this... what
these kids were trying to tell
me with no words, because they
don't speak.
Wow.
So then that's part of my
training: How can I decode this
kind of behavior, which is not a
word?
>> RUSHKOFF: Rapaille claims
that there are unconscious
associations for nearly every
product we buy, buried deep in
our brains.
>> One of my discoveries was
when you learn a word, whatever
it is-- "coffee," "love,"
"mother"-- the first time you
understand, you imprint the
meaning of this word, you create
a mental connection.
And so actually every word has a
mental highway.
I call that a code, an
unconscious code in the brain.
>> RUSHKOFF: Corporations love
the idea of buying a single key
to the psyches of vast numbers
of consumers, a simple code that
lies behind millions of
individual decisions.
Rapaille gave up psychiatry, and
says he has never looked back.
>> I have 50 of the Fortune 100
companies as clients.
>> I saw that.
That's very impressive.
>> RUSHKOFF: Tonight, Rapaille
has been invited to speak to the
Luxury Marketing Council of
America.
>> The premise of the Council is
to bring the smartest minds in
marketing together and help us
all figure out ways to get more
money from the customers with
the most money.
>> RUSHKOFF: Rapaille has been
commissioned by a handful of big
companies like Boeing and Acura
to break the code on luxury.
>> We're just delighted to have
you with us.
>> Thank you, thank you.
( applause )
Thank you.
Um, I don't believe what people
say.
So some people listen to what
they say, and they say, "Would
you want to buy that?
Do you want to do this?"
I don't believe what people say.
I want to understand why they do
what they do.
I found this word, and with that
I want to understand you guys.
And this is the word.
I hope I didn't make a mistake.
The right spelling?
>> RUSHKOFF: To crack the code
on luxury, Rapaille conducts a
series of focus groups.
>> I'm serious.
That's what I want to
understand-- how you feel about
it, and anything for me is
interesting.
>> Money?
>> Money!
>> RUSHKOFF: He takes his
subjects on a what he hopes will
be a three-stage psychic
journey: past reason, through
emotion, to the primal core,
where Rapaille insists all
purchasing decisions really lie.
>> We start with the cortex,
because people want to show how
intelligent they are.
So give them a chance.
We don't care what they say.
When people try to sell you
luxury things, what kind of word
they use?
>> Well-made?
>> Well-made.
Nothing new there.
And then we have a break.
They're usually very happy with
themselves, say, "Oh, we did a
good job," and so on.
When they come back, now we go
into the emotions, and I tell
them, "You're going to tell me a
little story, like if I was a
five-year-old from another
planet."
>> Once upon a time...
( laughter )
>> So suddenly, they are into a
mindset that is completely
different.
They don't try to be logical or
intelligent.
They just try to please the
five-year-old from another
planet.
>> I will send you and your
entire family to Maui.
>> They don't understand what
they're doing anymore.
Good!
That's what I want.
At the end of the second hour,
when we go to the break, they
say, "This guy is crazy.
What is he doing?
I thought I understood what we
were doing.
Now I don't understand anything.
I mean, I get paid to do that?"
This is excellent.
This is what I want.
>> We're going to be chosen for
a new reality show.
>> That's what it is, a reality
show!
>> Right.
>> Wait, there's 19 of us?
We all have our rooms?
>> They're going to give you a
million dollars.
They want to see how you spend
it.
>> Maybe that's what they'll do.
>> If you waste it or not.
>> Then when they come back for
the third hour, then there is no
more chairs.
"Uh-oh, what is going on here?
How come no chairs?"
And I explain to them that I
would like them to try to go
back to the very first time that
they experienced what we're
trying to understand.
>> Make yourself comfortable.
>> RUSHKOFF: Rapaille is hunting
for our primal urges.
He's after what he calls the
reptilian hot buttons that
compel us to action.
>> It's absolutely crucial to
understand what I call the
reptilian hot button.
My theory is very simple:
The reptilian always wins.
I don't care what you're going
to tell me intellectually;
give me the reptilian.
>> So I'm going to turn off the
lights off now, and we're going
to all relax together.
>> I want you to be in a mindset
a little bit like the one you
have when you wake up in the
morning.
You'll be surprised to see that
things come back to your mind
that you forgot sometime for 20,
30 years.
It's amazing.
>> RUSHKOFF: The scribbles of
consumers in the semi-darkness,
half-remembered words and
pictures associated with luxury,
somehow become Rapaille's keys
to unlocking the luxury code.
>> Once you get the code,
suddenly everything start making
sense.
"I understand why this car
sells, this car doesn't sell."
You know.
I understand why a small $29,000
Cadillac cannot sell.
You know, I understand why--
because it's off code.
Whoo.
>> RUSHKOFF: Over the years,
Rapaille has told car makers to
beef up the size of their SUVs
and tint the windows because the
code for SUVs is domination.
He told a French company trying
to sell cheese to Americans that
they were off-code.
>> ( commercial narration in
French )
>> In France, the cheese is
alive.
You never put the cheese in the
refrigerator because you don't
put your cat in the
refrigerator.
It's the same-- it's alive.
If I know that in America the
cheese is dead-- and I've been
studying cheeses in almost 50
states in America; I can tell
you, the cheese is dead
everywhere-- then I have to put
that up front.
I have to say, "This cheese is
safe, is pasteurized, is wrapped
up in plastic."
I know the plastic is a body
bag.
"You can put it in the fridge."
I know the fridge is the
morgue-- that's where you put
the dead bodies, eh?
And so once you know that, this
is the way you market cheese in
America.
>> It just got easier to just
say "Cheese!"
>> One word that kept coming up
is, in the stories and I
think... is "reach," reaching to
the next level.
>> RUSHKOFF: While Clotaire
Rapaille and his clients
continue their quest to crack
the code on luxury...
>> You know, it might be
interesting to explore the
difference between first-class
and world-class.
>> RUSHKOFF: ...Song Airlines is
running out of time and money.
A year into operation, the full
marketing team convenes in
Las Vegas to assess how the
experiment in creating a
lifestyle brand is working out.
>> On behalf of Song, I want to
welcome everybody here to
Las Vegas.
This time last year, this
airline was a project.
We had to create a brand, a
product, an identity, and
everything that is Song today
out of absolutely nothing.
This team has done an incredible
job of introducing the brand
called Song, this new airline.
>> RUSHKOFF: But there are
clouds on the horizon.
Parent company Delta is losing
billions of dollars, and Song's
marketing budget has been
drastically cut.
The intangible thing called Song
must deliver some tangible
results.
To do so, it must penetrate the
distracted minds of Americans.
The news so far is mixed.
>> Right now the greatest thing
that you've done so far is build
a really solid brand identity
for yourself.
That's coming through completely
clearly in the advertising.
People are completely
identifying with it.
>> RUSHKOFF: But while people
are responding to the
advertising, many consumers
don't know what the advertising
is for.
>> In terms of overall recall,
35% of our sample felt that they
had seen you somewhere.
Where we do start to see a
slight problem in terms of
"Which airline do you think this
advertising is for?"
We're losing almost 50% at that
point.
So what we're calling our true
recognition figure is those
people who both saw the
advertising and were confident
and knew that it was for Song,
and that was 15% of our sample.
>> RUSHKOFF: Making matters
worse for the Song marketing
team, runaway success Jet Blue
has decided to go after the same
markets as Song.
>> This one was unique.
The Boston Herald, which is kind
of like the New York Post or New
York Daily News, more of a
tabloid-ish newspaper in Boston,
sold their front page.
They actually allowed hard news
to be pushed off the cover.
So the entire cover looks just
like a Herald cover, and if
you're walking by a newsstand
and you saw it, you were like,
"Wow, Jet Blue must really be
important because they're on the
cover of the Herald," when they
really weren't.
>> RUSHKOFF: Song cannot compete
dollar-for-dollar against Jet
Blue, so they must be more
nimble.
>> I think we're very much a
guerrilla military force going
out and fighting against the big
guys.
We're going to have to pick and
choose our battles, and do it
wisely, placing media in places
where you wouldn't necessarily
expect an airline to be.
>> Handing out at concerts
branded earplugs.
>> We like the scratch-and-sniff
new plane smell.
>> Nightclub hand-stamps.
So instead of getting the club
name, you would have the Song
logo.
>> The fictional story were
someone in need gets an
invitation to a mystical villa
on a little-known island off of
Italy's coast.
What does that have to do with
Song?
This is just one example of a
story that might come out from
Song Books.
>> RUSHKOFF: With few bankable
ideas, Song's marketing effort
more than ever will depend on
its TV commercial.
A few weeks later, the Song team
flies out to Los Angeles to hear
consultant Andy Spade describe
his final vision for the
commercial.
>> We can also introduce, like,
from the side, like that girl
running through.
Like this little kid runs by,
and then suddenly, out of
nowhere, comes, you know, this
other woman who's kind of
running through camera.
So all these people are going
toward this gate, which is
obviously somewhere.
These are happy people.
It's like these are happy
people.
We're almost a voyeur watching
these happy people running
through this thing, and we're
boarding them now.
And I feel like, you look at
that, and you'll just say, "Wow,
this, this thing is about..."
>> It's a cross-section of...
>> "...these things."
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade is scanning
head shots for faces that exude
the essence of Song.
>> And I thought models are
wrong.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, real people are
wrong because it makes it very
kind of pedestrian.
Real people, but they look like
they're happy.
Not real people like LA Law
people.
They feel very Song.
>> Yeah.
>> She feels very Song.
He feels very Song.
( laughter )
>> It's definitely coming
together.
>> It just brings you, you know,
to this place, but not being
weird.
>> Right.
>> Magical without being, like,
surreal is kind of a tough thing
to pull off.
>> Exactly.
>> It's sure as hell hard to
describe.
>> It's very hard to describe.
That's why it sounds corny
saying it, but the pieces are
coming together.
>> It's just happy.
>> Whoo!
( upbeat music plays )
>> RUSHKOFF: Spade's ad finally
went on the air, but it may have
been too little, too late.
Though Song has built loyalty,
its parent company, Delta, is
careening toward bankruptcy and
may bring Song down with it.
>> The code applies across the
board.
>> RUSHKOFF: In Tuxedo Park, New
York, Dr. Rapaille is also
nearing the end of his process.
He's ready to unveil the code on
luxury.
>> You can change the content.
>> RUSHKOFF: Rapaille's clients,
who represent industries as
diverse as insurance,
automobiles, and fragrances, are
filled with anticipation.
Having together paid several
hundred thousand dollars, they
are convinced the code will give
them a competitive advantage, no
matter what they're selling.
>> I think the code we
discovered was there already a
long time, you know, ago, and is
going to be around for
generations and generations.
>> RUSHKOFF: We were not allowed
to see the actual code.
Its secrecy is worth a lot of
money to Rapaille's customers.
>> The content might vary, but
the structure is the same.
>> RUSHKOFF: But the clients,
many of whom have worked with
Rapaille before, are
enthusiastic.
So far, you're sold on what he's
doing?
>> Yes.
I strongly believe in what he's
doing.
Strongly.
>> RUSHKOFF: Marc Salmon is the
Vice President for Development
at Firmenich, a Swiss fragrance
and flavor designer.
>> We need to absorb, absorb the
code, check it, create products
that are in code, try to
understand, looking at what is
existing, what are the on-code
and off-code.
>> We're here because we are
always looking for ways to be
more competitive in the
marketplace.
>> RUSHKOFF: Blake Emery is an
executive at the Boeing
Corporation, which has been
working with Dr. Rapaille for
almost a year.
>> The interior of our new
airplane, the 7E7 Dreamliner,
much of that interior is based
on research that we did with Dr.
Rapaille.
Everything you see has an overt
improvement, but there is also a
hidden, unarticulated itch that
we're scratching, and I can't
give you an example of those.
>> RUSHKOFF: So in other words,
the bigger bin, if you find out
that...
>> But see, there's an
obvious...
>> RUSHKOFF: ...people see the
bin as Mommy, so then you make
the bin shaped like Mommy, so
now they get Mommy out of it?
Or is there another feature
somewhere?
>> No.
You know, once this information
gets out into the marketplace,
once our interior is out there,
the competition can copy it,
right?
You would say, "Well, why don't
they just make a bin like that,
and then they can do just what
we did."
However, if you don't really
know why we did the bin the way
we did, you will not do it
right.
>> RUSHKOFF: Of course, it's
impossible to know if Rapaille's
excursions through the
collective unconscious really
uncover what drives us, whether
to Boeing airplanes or any other
product.
>> Hmm
>> RUSHKOFF: But even if he is
onto something, you have to
wonder about the net effect of
reducing us to our most primal
impulses.
What about the environment?
If the lizard wants the
Hummer...
>> Right.
>> RUSHKOFF: ...then... and the
lizard's not going to listen to
the environmentalist.
>> Right.
>> RUSHKOFF: Then isn't it our
job as aware people to get the
reptile to shut up and appeal to
the cortex, to appeal to the
mammal?
>> All right.
Now, you see, the problem is
here is that, if you think, all
right, the people that want to
do good not always do good.
All right?
So the people that want to do
good, for example, let's say,
"Okay, we need to make smaller
cars, right, to protect the
environment."
Then nobody buys the smaller
car.
Why?
Because they're too small.
So then the result is they go
into trucks.
>> RUSHKOFF: Looks like I'm not
going to win this one.
After all, it's hard to argue
against the reptilian brain.
>> The point is, we have to
understand the unspoken needs of
the people.
It works.
Good marketing research works.
When we say it works, it means
that marketers understand the
real need of the customers.
Sometimes unspoken.
And they deliver.
"Give me what I want."
>> RUSHKOFF: "Give us what we
want"-- it is has become the
imperative that no corporation
or any persuader can afford to
ignore.
That's why modern political
campaigns have also come to rely
on an army of pollsters and
market researchers, all taking
the moment-by-moment pulse of
the man on the street.
>> I've got a rule, which is cab
drivers and antique dealers know
more about America than anybody
else.
And when the cab drivers feel a
certain way, I know I need to
listen.
>> RUSHKOFF: No one has imported
the techniques and philosophy of
market research into politics
more successfully than Frank
Luntz.
His suburban Washington mansion
is a shrine to the public
zeitgeist.
>> Everything in here has a
relationship to pop culture.
It's what people prioritize in
their lives.
The truth is, as much as we want
to focus on politics, the
American people would rather
watch television.
As much as we want to talk about
substance, they'd rather listen
to music.
So I have to know what they're
watching, I have to know what
they're listening to, and I've
got to know why.
>> RUSHKOFF: Luntz has built his
career on a simple idea: It
doesn't matter what you want to
tell the public; it's about what
they want to hear.
His clients have been some of
the most prominent Republican
politicians of the last decade.
There was the mayoral campaign
for Rudolph Giuliani in 1993;
his work for Silvio Berlusconi
in Italy; and especially his
collaboration with Newt Gingrich
on the famous Contract With
America, the document that
ushered in the Republican
revolution in Congress.
Luntz gives his clients one
consistent piece of advice:
Heed the public will.
>> There's one technique that's
more important than anything
else, and that's the technique
of listening, and that's
basically what I do.
I ask a lot of questions, and I
know how to listen.
If an electricity company stood
up and said, "We want to do it
for your benefit, we want to do
it for our benefit, we want to
do it for everyone's benefit,
and so we have a better approach
to efficiency and to
environmental cleanliness."
Is that kind of language
positive or negative to you?
>> (TOGETHER): Positive.
>> By a show of hands?
>> RUSHKOFF: Tonight, Luntz's
client is not a candidate, but a
Florida utility wanting to build
public support for a change in
how it's regulated on the
environment.
>> I know that the public is
very down on corporate America
in general, and they're down on
power companies.
So what is the language, what is
the information, what are the
facts, what are the figures that
would get Americans to say, "You
know what, my electricity
company, it's okay."
"21st-century technology."
One, two, three, four.
"21st-century approach."
>> RUSHKOFF: Luntz's specialty
is testing language, finding
words that work.
>> "Integrity."
One, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
11.
"Reliability."
There's the other one.
If an electric company can
demonstrate accountability,
responsibility, and reliability
when it comes to the
environment, will that make you
feel better about them?
>> Yes.
>> RUSHKOFF: It's an art that
even his political opponents
seem to grudgingly admire.
>> Frank Luntz doesn't do
issues; he does language around
issues.
He figures out what words will
best sell an issue, and he polls
them and he tests them and he
focus groups them, and he comes
up, issue by issue, with how to
talk about it and how not to
talk about it.
>> If the language works, the
language works.
>> Right, I know.
It's just amazing.
>> RUSHKOFF: Luntz has sold his
corporate and political clients
the idea that a few carefully
chosen words can make all the
difference, but he's not just
looking for any words.
Luntz's quarry are those words
that grab our guts and move us
to act on an emotional level.
>> It's amazing that those two
words...
>> Constantly.
>> ...in almost everything that
we do come up at the top.
>> So why do you think that
companies don't use them enough?
>> I don't know.
>> 80% of our life is emotion,
and only 20% is intellect.
I am much more interested in how
you feel than how you think.
How you think is on the outside;
how you feel's on the inside.
So that's what I need to
understand.
You're going to use these to
register whether you agree or
disagree, whether you believe or
disbelieve.
The dials go from zero to 100.
>> On the one hand, you have
land which has no fossil fuels
associated with it...
>> RUSHKOFF: To get at his
subjects' gut feelings, Luntz
has them register their moment-
by-moment responses to a speech
by a power company executive.
Republicans are on the red line,
and Democrats on the green.
Luntz is watching for both sides
to meet in an emotional
crescendo.
>> ...change fuels.
There will be a number of things
that are available.
>> Climbing, climbing, climbing.
"Changing fuels."
>> ...phase out older, less
efficient plants, and they would
be replaced...
>> Bingo!
Look: "Phasing out of older
official plants," he's now up
into the mid to upper 70s with
that.
You're replacing the bad with
the good.
It's almost like in with the
good air, out with the bad.
That might be an analogy that we
might want to try, instead of
the automobile analogy.
This is going to work.
Watch.
This will work.
>> ...make technology such as
hydroelectric power, wind
energy, geothermal energy,
nuclear energy...
>> Check it.
I told you.
The words work.
The words apply to the policy.
This how we are going to sell
it.
>> ...from California, output-
based standards...
>> Look at this!
Hold it.
Stop, stop.
>> RUSHKOFF: By the end of his
session, Luntz thinks he's found
the language his client can use
to create a groundswell of
public support.
>> Now I'll be able to walk to
this electricity company on
Monday, and be able to say to
them, "Your policy makes sense,
and here's the language to
explain it."
That was the eureka moment, when
I watched people nod their
heads, I watched them look to
each other and they were willing
at this point to fight for this
position.
>> RUSHKOFF: But watching Luntz
work, I couldn't help wondering,
do the words he's found help the
public see the issue more
clearly or do they disguise it?
Is Luntz listening to us so his
clients can give us what we want
or so he can figure out how to
make us want what they have to
sell?
>> You're ducking the question!
You're ducking the reality test.
>> This is a guy who is
merchandizing ideas, and
merchandizing a movement, and
merchandizing a political party.
And in many instances the words
that he says are the ones that
resonate, are ones that make...
that obscure, to some extent,
the issue.
>> The right name makes the
policy sell better.
It's just like putting a name on
a bar of soap or any other
commercial product.
It matters what you name things.
>> RUSHKOFF: Journalist Nicholas
Lemann wrote a profile of Luntz
in the New Yorker magazine
called "The Word Lab."
He described how Luntz once
turned public opinion simply by
replacing the name "estate tax"
with the more emotionally
charged "death tax."
>> As far as I can tell, in the
entire developed world, every
single country had an estate
tax, and it was completely
uncontroversial all over the
world.
And it is clearly the case that
this construction, this
rhetorical construction of
calling it the death tax, took
it from the realm of something
everybody was for in a just
unquestioned way into something
that most people seem to be
against and is on its way to
being eliminated.
>> Look, for years political
people and lawyers, who, by the
way are the worst communicators,
used the phrase "estate tax."
And for years they couldn't
eliminate it.
The public wouldn't support it
because the word "estate" sounds
wealthy.
Someone like me comes around and
realizes that it's not an estate
tax, it's a death tax, because
you're taxed at death.
And suddenly something that
isn't viable achieves the
support of 75% of the American
people.
It's the same tax, but nobody
really knows what an estate is.
But they certainly know what it
means to be taxed when you die.
I'd argue that is a
clarification; that's not an
obfuscation.
>> RUSHKOFF: Luntz has
admonished Republican
politicians to talk about "tax
relief" instead of "tax cuts,"
and to replace "the war in Iraq"
with "the war on terror."
He once told his party to speak
of "climate change," not "global
warming."
>> What is the difference?
It is climate change.
Some people call it global
warming, some people call it
climate change.
What is the difference?
>> RUSHKOFF: It apparently made
enough difference to Republicans
that they began to use "climate
change" almost exclusively.
>> ...caused global... it caused
climate change.
>> The President's global
climate-change initiative...
>> ...climate-change research...
>> And we must address the issue
of global climate change.
>> I don't argue with you that
words can sometimes be used to
confuse, but it's up to the
practitioners of the study of
language to apply them for good
and not for evil.
It is just like fire: fire can
heat your house or burn it down.
>> I'm optimistic about America
'cause I believe in the believe
in the people of America.
>> RUSHKOFF: Still, the rise of
consultants like Luntz has led
to an increase in the
emotionality of American
political campaigns.
>> We are a country of the
future.
We're a country of optimists.
We're the can-do people.
>> RUSHKOFF: More and more,
electioneering, particularly
political advertising, has left
behind facts for visceral
appeals.
>> If you're looking for an
example of how advertising is a
really corrosive force in
society, I advise you to look
away from consumer-product
advertising and just look at
political advertising, because
it's a stain on our democracy.
You know, you're selling soup or
soap or oatmeal, one thing you
basically have to do is tell the
truth-- not the eternal truth,
but the factual truth.
So, by and large, advertising is
essentially truthful, except
political advertising, which
year after year-- and it gets
worse every year-- is just the
artful assembling of nominal
facts into hideous, outrageous
lies.
>> Raising taxes is a habit of
Kerry's...
>> He supported tax breaks for
exporting jobs...
>> RUSHKOFF: In fact, while
consumers are protected by law
from false advertising of
products, politicians can
legally say pretty much whatever
they want.
>> John Kerry lied to get his
Bronze Star.
>> For Bush, drug company
profits come first.
>> RUSHKOFF: The ads leading up
to the 2004 election, according
to many experts, were the most
deceptive ever.
>> But, pressured by fellow
liberals, he's changed his
position.
>> RUSHKOFF: All this noise has
worn many voters out.
To fight political ad fatigue,
marketers have had to get
creative.
( doorbell rings )
The idea that emerged in a major
way in this past election is a
twist on an old strategy:
reaching out to voters on a one-
to-one basis.
They call it narrowcasting.
>> We are at the threshold of a
revolution in political
communication.
What we're about to see is the
ability to send very directed
messages to very small audiences
on an ongoing basis anywhere in
the country.
>> We're going to be helping
participate with voter
registration in a parade...
>> RUSHKOFF: These canvassers
for "America Coming Together," a
liberal advocacy group, did some
of the first experiments with
narrowcasting techniques in the
run-up to the 2004 election.
Every afternoon, ACT canvassers
here in the key swing state of
Ohio were given the names and
addresses of potential voters.
They were sent into the field
with a lot of information about
each of the voters they were
visiting, profiles compiled by
computer from demographic data,
including exactly what issues
the voters were likely to
respond to.
Each ACT canvasser was armed
with a Palm Pilot that could
play a short, customized video.
>> If you don't mind, I just
have a, just a one, a clip
that's not even one minute that
I just wanted to show you about
some of the issues that I just
mentioned.
>> RUSHKOFF: This potential
voter was being shown a movie
about job losses for African
Americans in Ohio.
>> African American unemployment
has skyrocketed to a ten-year
high.
>> RUSHKOFF: Elsewhere, other
Ohioans were seeing different
video messages tailored to their
own personal demographic
profiles.
>> Ohio has gone backwards.
>> It sure has.
>> RUSHKOFF: Right now, there
are only a few different
messages, but pretty soon, if
all goes according to plan, they
will be customized for dozens of
different demographic groups.
>> If you want to get up to 51%
of the vote, you probably have
to assemble a coalition of 20 or
30 or 50 demographic groups.
So as a modern candidate, you
will want to have a strategy for
how to communicate with each one
of those demographic groups.
You want a targeted ad on the
gun control, on the pro-life, on
the military, on the economic
issues.
You're going to want to have a
message that's tailored for each
one of those groups.
If you don't do it, you're
putting out broadcast ads in a
narrowcast world.
>> RUSHKOFF: But where did all
this information come from?
How did political parties and
advocacy groups know whom to
reach with what message?
The answer to that question
begins here.
The Acxiom corporation of Little
Rock, Arkansas, is one of the
biggest companies you've never
heard of.
Somewhere in these acres of
blinking computers is carefully
guarded data about you: not just
your name, address, and phone
number, but probably also the
catalogs you get, the cars
you've bought, and maybe even
what shoes you wear and whether
you like dogs or cats.
Acxiom's information is culled
from census data and tax
records, those product surveys
you answered, and customer
records supplied by corporations
and credit-card companies that
are Acxiom clients.
Acxiom sifts all this data to
produce lists of target
consumers for their clients.
>> If you're a company, a bank,
a retailer, what you would do is
say you want left-handed people
of a certain ethnic group, and
they're going to be able to do a
list for you.
You can get marketing lists of
Hispanics who make between
$20,000 and $40,000 who are U.S.
citizens.
You can get marketing lists of
people who suffer from
incontinence and have bought
those kinds of products in the
pharmacy.
You can get all sorts of things
that can be very narrow.
>> RUSHKOFF: Acxiom divides all
consumers into one of 70
different types they call life
stage segments, encompassing
everything from what hobbies you
have to what products you buy,
where you live to what you
believe in.
According to Acxiom, I am a
Shooting Star: 36 to 45,
married, wake up early and go
for runs, watch Seinfeld reruns,
travel abroad, and no kids yet.
We're working on the kids part,
but Acxiom probably already
knows that.
Their computers are programmed
not only to figure out who we
are now, but where we are going,
and when we will get there.
What Acxiom is promising is
nothing less than the solution
to clutter: Send us ads only for
products we really want, and
anticipate just when we will
want them.
>> You can't just now take an ad
and put it on TV and hope for
the best.
You need to get smarter about
your consumers.
You need to understand their
purchasing predisposition.
You need to understand how
they're changing.
You need to understand more
about them.
And that's technology.
>> RUSHKOFF: Of course, the
prospect of finding the right
audience at the right time is
irresistible to politicians as
well.
>> I'd like to welcome everybody
to the grand opening of the new
headquarters of the Democratic
Party of the United States of
America.
( cheers and applause )
>> RUSHKOFF: In recent years,
both parties have bought data
from Acxiom and companies like
it.
The Republicans don't talk about
how they use it, but the
Democrats do.
>> But if I want to sit at my
desk, pull up on the screen the
state of Ohio, and say, "Who in
Ohio says that education's going
to be the number-one issue
they're going to vote on?", six
seconds later, 1.2 million names
will pop up.
I then have the ability to hit
buttons and do telemarketing to
them immediately, or to send e-
mails to them immediately, send
direct mail to them immediately,
or actually send someone to
their door to talk to them.
>> RUSHKOFF: One Democrat found
narrowcasting just in time.
John Kerry's victories in the
2004 Iowa and New Hampshire
primaries were national news,
but few knew the whole story of
Kerry's stunning comeback.
>> ...repair shop today.
>> I'm really looking forward to
campaigning in New Hampshire.
>> Kerry tuned up new support.
>> RUSHKOFF: He was behind in
the polls and couldn't find a
way to reach voters through all
that political noise.
>> We're going to win!
We're going to make this happen!
>> RUSHKOFF: But the Kerry
campaign had discovered a way to
identify and talk to thousands
of voters who had been turned
off by political ads.
It wasn't campaign workers who
found them, it was a couple of
off-the-shelf PCs sifting reams
of demographic data.
Overseeing the operation was a
little-known Kerry consultant
named Kenneth Strasma.
>> Democratic primary voters in
Iowa and New Hampshire were
getting called by ten different
candidates for months and
months, and it was getting very
hard to reach people.
So what we did is we looked at
all the information we had from
the folks we'd called so far,
and came up with a Kerry voter
profile, which gave us the
percent likelihood that someone
would say yes, they'd support
Kerry, if we called them.
>> RUSHKOFF: This sort of voter
profiling, which both parties
use to chase down swing voters
in the general election,
incorporates behaviors we don't
normally associate with voting,
like whether you have caller ID,
a sedan or a hatchback, or more
than one pet.
The thing about narrowcasting is
that it gives politicians a
chance to say things to some
people they might not want
others to hear.
You can take the most
controversial message that maybe
wouldn't work on TV, but still
deliver it to the 20,000 people
in a certain district who will
respond favorably to it.
>> Oh, absolutely.
There are... some of the biggest
motivators in terms of issues
are also the most divisive
issues.
On one end of the spectrum
you've got abortion rights, pro-
life/pro-choice, and you've also
got gun control and gun
ownership rights.
And those are both messages that
people aren't likely to go up on
TV with in a national campaign
because they're very polarizing.
But there are advocacy groups on
both sides who've gotten very
good at figuring out where their
voters, who vote based on those
issues, are, and getting a
message to those people without
necessarily getting a divisive
message to the whole electorate.
>> Roy Barnes sold all us
Georgians out!
>> RUSHKOFF: In 2001, President
Bush's chief strategist, Karl
Rove, conducted a series of
experiments in narrowcasting for
the GOP.
The following year, the state
Republican parties put Rove's
finding into practice.
In Georgia, they were used in a
campaign to unseat a slew of
incumbent Democrats.
>> I mean, it's, you know, the
flag did have something to do
with it.
>> RUSHKOFF: The GOP used the
incendiary issue of the
Confederate emblem on the
Georgia state flag to galvanize
a select group of usually
apathetic male voters.
>> You mess with our flag, you
pack your bag!
>> RUSHKOFF: Targeting their
message door-to-door and through
telemarketing, the team drove
high numbers of rural males to
the polls, and delivered a
Republican sweep.
>> When you start sending
messages which appeal to sort
of, you know, white people in
pickup trucks, and then you're
also sending messages to black
people in Cleveland, and it's a
qualitatively different kind of
message, you're really trying to
stir, you're really trying to
appeal to those aspects of
people which sees themselves as
different from each other.
>> Instead of being Americans,
we're sliced into 70 demographic
groups.
We might be sliced into hundreds
of subcategories under that.
And then the worry is that we
don't share anything as a
people.
>> I'll bring that to the
screen...
>> The result is living in a
society where people, rather
than having an idea of the
common good, increasingly see
their own personal well-being or
their own community's or
ethnicity's well-being as the
essential issue of democracy.
>> RUSHKOFF: Sorted and sifted,
we slip easily into our
demographic tribes, each of us
focused on our own list of needs
and desires, which, after all,
is exactly the way marketers
want it, because as long as
we're thinking about ourselves,
we're better consumers.
>> Take a look at advertisements
per se.
What is, what is their ideology?
What is their message?
What do they value?
What do they ask of us?
>> We see you.
>> There's no limit to what you
can accomplish.
>> Commercials say to us,
endlessly, "You come first."
>> Any way you want it!
>> It will let out the seat for
you.
>> I didn't have to leave home!
>> "You are the focus of
attention.
You matter."
An Army of one, you see.
>> Because you're worth it.
>> RUSHKOFF: It does feel good
to live in a world where we come
first, where our every desire is
mapped, our every thought seems
to matter.
The persuaders listen to us when
others won't, and tell us we can
be anything we want to be.
Best of all, they make us feel
powerful.
>> The consumer is now in total
control.
I mean, she can go home, she's
going to decide when she buys,
what she buys, where she buys,
how she buys.
Oh, boy, they get it, you know.
They are so empowered at every
age.
All the fear's gone, and all the
control is passed over to the
consumer.
It's a good thing.
>> RUSHKOFF: It was near the end
of my tour through the landscape
of persuasion that I came to
realize how the problem of
clutter finally gets solved.
Marketers find a way so deep
inside each one of us that it no
longer feels like persuasion at
all.
Maybe we are in control.
Once the market becomes the lens
through which we choose to see
the world, then there's no us
and them anymore.
We're all persuaders.
>> The secret of it all, the
secret of all persuasion, is to
induce the person to persuade
himself.
>> This report continues on
Frontline's web site, where
you'll find a forum with
Douglas Rushkoff and others on
the new techniques of
persuasion-- why we're
vulnerable, what it's doing to
us, what we can do about it; a
look at the concerns over the
internet's virtual marketing;
and a look into the research on
how cultural messages act on
the brain.
>> ...people have no idea...
>> Plus Frontline's extended
interviews with those featured
in this report.
>> We develop immunities.
>> And a chance to watch the
full program again online.
Then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.